---
layout: default
title: About
---

h2. {{page.title}}

My name is Daniel and at the time of this writing I am 26 year old, a computer science grad student and a developer for embedded systems. I am a happy unix user, mainly using Mac OS X and FreeBSD. In my free time I like to watch movies, play basketball as a forward in my university club and have long breakfasts.

I had already given blogging a try some years ago. However after some postings I found myself updating my "wordpress installation":http://www.wordpress.org more often than I actually wrote something. Eventually I gave up writing completely. Earlier this year then, I discovered "github.com":http://github.com and the possibility to generate web content with "jekyll":http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll. Since I had always wanted to write again, but never felt like hassling with some blogging platform again, the jekyll system finally felt like the right way to start over. This is why I created this site, which took a great piece of structural inspiration from "al3x.net":http://al3x.net.

I do not have a general topic for this site other than that I write down everything for which I find the time to. This will most likely include a lot of technical topics but not exclusively as I also want to use this site to keep my written skills in shape, which sometimes get neglected during all the the programming.

You can contact me under $MYFIRSTNAME@lordofhosts.de.

p. Disclaimer:
I try hard to check all the links I post here, but since the destination sites are not under my control, I can not take any warranty or responsibility for their content.  


