---
layout: post
published: true
title: Bye Bye Fitbit
---

About a year ago I decided that I had to do something about my fitness. Since
moving to NYC about 1.5 years prior I went from having basketball training two
to three times a week and a game on the weekend to basically not doing any
sports. Needless to say this didn't really impact my fitness in any positive
way. In addition I was also used to eat quite a lot since basketball training
had been enough sports so I could easily burn it off again. And while I didn't
have practice anymore I was still used to eat the same amount of food
basically.

So something needed to change. I had tried running several times, but since I
find it utterly boring I never really got into the habit of doing it
regularly. Plus there is no real instant feedback from running, so even when I
managed to go, I never had the feeling of actually doing sports. Clearly I
needed a way to track progress. So the first step was to get a scale. That way
I would be able to at least track my weight. I decided to get the [Fitbit
Aria][aria] scale as I liked the idea of syncing it to an account where I can
get pretty graphs. [I like graphs][graphit]. The next step then was to track
how active I am and what I eat so that I could get a rough overview of general
activity and calorie burn. As I had already created an account with Fitbit
for the scale I decided to get the [Fitbit flex][flex] wristband (I later
replaced it with the now discontinued [Force][force]) to track steps and
calories.

Now I had feedback and graphs for what I was doing all day, how active I was,
how long/good I was sleeping and I kept track of what I was eating. Having
this incentive meant that I would be going running or shooting some hoops for
at least 20 minutes everyday before or after work. I also stopped eating
everything I found (which seems to be big part of the secret of losing weight)
as it would go into my food journal in the Fitbit application. And this worked
really well. Over the course of a couple of months I lost about 11 kilos
(about 24 lbs) and even had to [put new holes in my belt][belttweet].

But soon after all of this my habit of how I used the Fitbit changed. In early
2014 I decided that I didn't want to work long hours anymore and improve my
work-life balance. This meant I took the conscious decision that I would leave
work at around 6pm everyday to catch the ferry home. No more staying late
unless things are on fire and no more working from home after I left the
office. If I wanted to get more stuff done I'd have to get up early. While the
getting up early part didn't work very well at the beginning, this now meant
that I would go to bed at a regular time (usually between 10-11pm) and get
about 9-10h of sleep most nights. This however made my Fitbit sleep tracking
basically obsolete for me. I knew that I slept well most nights and if I
didn't it was mostly because I violated the rule and went to bed late (or I
was on-call and got woken up at night). In addition to that I got a
[Pebble][pebble] and was now rocking dual wearables. Which really wasn't a
pleasant feeling. Both the Fitbit and the Pebble aren't super big but having
stuff hanging on your wrist all day meant that I would come home and take both
of because it felt much better not to have anything on the wrists. And that
feeling amplified when I went to bed. I felt much more relaxed and less
restricted when I wouldn't wear anything on my wrists when I was sleeping. So
most days I would take off the Fitbit (and Pebble) when I got home and not put
it back on until the next morning (with the exception of being on-call where
we [use sleep data to improve the on-call rotation][opsweekly]). I still liked
having graphs about steps, but mostly for the sake of having graphs. I didn't
act on them in any way other than occasionally [bragging on twitter about how much I
walked][bragtweet].

So when I came home from a week of vacation in early July I decided to not put
the Fitbit back on at all and see how it feels. And it was great! I felt much
more free and less restricted. I hadn't been using the data it collected for
anything really in almost 6 months. Plus I never really felt comfortable with
the fact that details about my activity and calorie intake live on a server in
the cloud. Thanks (partly) to the Fitbit I got back to a good intuition about
how much I should eat and how much sport I should do every week. I now go to
the gym regularly, have a way better sleep schedule and eat more consciously
and more importantly less than 1.5 years ago (although there are definitely
improvements to make there still). And if anything is off about food, sports
or sleep I notice immediately as I start to feel unwell. This doesn't mean I
would never ever use a fitness tracker again. If they eventually end up being
less intrusive in daily life and maybe even come with a collection application
I can install on my own servers I would happily try it again. But for now it's
"Bye Bye Fitbit".


[aria]: http://www.fitbit.com/aria
[flex]: http://www.fitbit.com/flex
[force]: http://www.fitbit.com/force
[bragtweet]: https://twitter.com/mrtazz/statuses/483125970245660674
[graphit]: http://shouldigraphit.com
[belttweet]: https://twitter.com/mrtazz/statuses/399937629078441984
[opsweekly]: http://codeascraft.com/2014/06/19/opsweekly-measuring-on-call-experience-with-alert-classification/
[pebble]: https://getpebble.com
