---
layout: post
published: true
title: First month with the Spark Notebook
---

When the [Spark Notebook][spark_notebook] got announced on Kickstarter I was
first a bit hesitant as I have struggled before balancing digital and paper
notes. But nonetheless I still always felt something was missing from the way
I was currently going about planning my day and taking notes. My todos are all
neatly organized [in OmniFocus][of_post] and I did most of my note taking in
VIM as text files in a folder structure. This works quite well and I even can
sync them with my phone. However I always felt too restricted when taking
notes without being able to scribble. There are things that just somehow feel
better when written by hand. I have tried to bring a Moleskine notebook with
me all the thing but somehow I rarely actually take notes. So when I saw the
Spark Notebook I was somewhat sceptical but the whole structure and design
seemed really thought through and as if it could actually fit into my setup
and fill the gaps I was having. So I decided to [back the
campaign][kickstart_tweet] and early February I got my 2 spark notebooks for
2015 and started using them.

### How I use it
The arrival of the notebooks coincided with the first Monday of February for
me. So that Monday morning I sat down to start to fill out my yearly, monthly
and weekly goals. The notebooks had actually arrived on the weekend already.
However other than looking at them quickly I didn't touch them but spent the
weekend researching the intended use of the notebooks on the
[popforms][popforms] site. I read about how to set the [yearly
theme][yearly_theme], [create goals for the month][monthly_plan] and how to
[plan your week][weekly_plan]. This first review probably took a whole hour or
so for me because I had to do the whole thing. But it was actually a pretty
good exercise and a great way to reflect a bit more about the things I have on
my todo list. Since I've written my original blog post about OmniFocus, I've
added a couple of useful perspectives and one of them is for planning my weeks
and days. It's basically modeled after [this blog post][plan_perspective] and
shows all not on-hold or blocked projects from which I then pick things to
work on every day. This perspective was the basis for my monthly and weekly
planning with the spark notebooks. It reflects all my duties and obligations.
For this first review after I set my yearly goals, planned my month to be in
line with those goals (in an ideal world your work projects align with your
yearly goals but in reality it's a healthy mix of things you have to do and
things that bring you closer to your long term goals) and then planned my
weekly tasks according to my montly plan I went on to [time
blocking][timeblocking]. I grabbed my calendar and put all the meetings in the
time blocking view of the spark notebook. I then went ahead and filled all
slots (or most of them) where I didn't have meetings with blocks for things I
wanted to get done from my weekly goals. And after this hour or two of
planning I went into my week. The following weekly and monthly reviews were
much quicker as I didn't have to do everything from scratch again. To the
point where my weekly reviews take me between 15 and 30 minutes right now.

A somewhat big surprise was however that it turns out I can't plan my whole
week with time blocks in advance. I did that for the first two and every time
interruptions and unplanned work and meetings destroyed my carefully layed out
plan. So now I timeblock the first 2 or 3 days of the week on Monday and then
do it again on Wednesday for the rest of the week. And while doing that I
literally put those blocks into my calendar as well so people see that I'm
working on something during that time and that no meetings should go there if
possible. I also stopped putting meetings in the spark notebook outline as it
was somewhat a double maintenance of the same thing. So the calendar for me
holds the daily outline of meetings and blocks of time where I wanna do work.
And the notebook tells me how I have planned to spend those time blocks. This
has worked pretty well for me so far and I definitely have more structured
time than I used to.

Another great tool in the notebook are the meeting notes templates. They give
you a structured form in which to write your notes down. Although I have some
problems with this feature (see below) I've really come to like them for
facilitating PostMortems. They are great for taking notes during the
reconstruction of the timeline and the "Follow Up/Nest Steps" box is perfect
for jotting down remediation items before transferring them to Jira. I don't
use the "Main points" box as it doesn't make a ton of sense for PostMortems
and I still rarely take notes in other meetings (something I definitely want
to get better at).

### Balancing it with OmniFocus
A point I was curious about when I ordered the notebook was how this could be
balanced with my OmniFocus setup. I rely heavily on OmniFocus and everything
that needs to get done has a place in there. And I really didn't want to end
doing duplicate work. So for the first week or two it felt kinda weird. I was
a bit confused about where to look for what to work on next and which things
to track where and in which granularity. I started out with a pretty detailed
time blocking setup in the notebook and followed that one closely. But that
turned out to be too much. I found my natural balance there to put the higher
level tasks/projects in the time blocks and then have the break down of those
in OmniFocus. This means I can have the overview of what I am supposed to work
on in a given time slot in the notebook and then just open OmniFocus to see
what the next important part is for that project. Thus I still do my weekly
review in OmniFocus and then go on to plan the week in the spark notebook
picking things from the OmniFocus "Plan" perspective.

The natural balance there is that the spark notebook gives me the higher level
overview of my plans that I was always missing in OmniFocus. It's a really
great software for structuring lists, todos and break projects down into
smaller things. But I have never figured out a great way to plan the higher
level in there. And that's where the spark notebook fits in perfectly for me.
So when I start to work in a time blocked slot, I check the notebook what I
have noted down to work on during that time and then check OmniFocus for the
next action on that project. This sounds a bit more tedious than it really is,
often enough I remember what I allocated the time block for and don't need to
open the notebook and even if I do, it's not a ton of overhead.

### Short comings and things that don't work for me (so far)
After using the spark notebook for a couple of weeks now I have found a couple
of things that unfortunately didn't work that well for me or that I was
missing. None of them are a dealbreaker and I wasn't expecting everything to
make perfect sense, since it's probably impossibly to make something work for
so many people with different work and life styles.

The first thing that I was missing was more bookmarks. The spark notebook
comes with 2 bookmarks to quickly find pages. I'm using one to mark my weekly
time block table and the other one to mark the position of where I left off
with meeting notes. However I would love to have at least two more to be able
to quickly find the monthly overview and the project pages. Maybe even three
to also quickly find the scribble pages at the end. And I would love it if the
spark notebook also had a Moleskine style pocket in the back to put smaller
cards and notes in.

Speaking of the meeting notes, I'm really enjoying the layout and it's
extremely good for taking structured meeting notes. However the fact that
there is only a limited number of them means that I'm constantly trying to
decide if a meeting is important enough to "waste" a meeting page if there is
a chance that I'm not taking notes at all (did I mention that I'm a poor
notetaker?). Especially with the anxiety to run out of meetings notes in my
spark notebook and then having to bring a second notebook to meetings.  I
don't think this is something that can be fixed within the spark notebook but
I have to be ok with.

I have also yet to find a use case for the project planning pages and the
scribble/free use pages at the end. My problem with the project planning notes
is that it's easier for me to keep that part in OmniFocus (at least the task
breakdown, I could definitely benefit from doing a more formal write up of the
goals and notes write up) and easier to find as I don't have a bookmark left
over to use for the project pages. Kind of the same goes for the free use
pages at the end for me. I haven't really used them yet as I can't bookmark
them and I'm afraid of running out.

The 30 day challenge is something I'm really torn on. I love the idea but it's
been really hard for me to follow. I'm not sure if it's because it's a bit out
of sight in the weekly plan (maybe I should account time for it in the time
blocking more) or something else. But something I want to try there is to
always mention the challenge as another weekly goal in the plan and see if
that helps.

As I mentioned above, I also had to adapt my time blocking routine to do it
twice a week as planning all time blocks for the week in advance doesn't work
for me. I have so far also written down 6-7 goals per week as this seems to be
the number of things I can actually find the time to work on. I don't always
finish all of them and I might try to break them down more in the future.

### Verdict

While I haven't yet fully come to use all the features the spark notebook
provides, it's really been a great addition to my planning tools. Especially
since I've always missed a higher level planning overview with OmniFocus, this
is where the notebook fits in great for me. It gives me a good sense of the
higher level things I need to do and whether or not I have allocated time for
it appropriately on a weekly level. I use both tools to plan work and non-work
related things and the combination of the spark notebook and OmniFocus has
definitely become [crucial to my productivity][busy_tweet].


[spark_notebook]: http://www.thesparknotebook.com/
[kickstart_tweet]: https://twitter.com/mrtazz/statuses/535621491392806912
[of_post]: http://www.unwiredcouch.com/2014/05/13/omnifocus.html
[busy_tweet]: https://twitter.com/mrtazz/status/577961903995113472
[yearly_theme]: https://popforms.com/how-to-create-a-yearly-theme/
[monthly_plan]: https://popforms.com/getting-things-done-my-monday-morning-routine/
[weekly_plan]: https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/katemats/spark-notebook-a-place-for-your-life-plans-and-gre/posts/1121110
[timeblocking]: https://popforms.com/how-to-do-time-blocking/
[popforms]: https://popforms.com
[plan_perspective]: http://simplicitybliss.com/blog/omnifocus-perspectives-redux-planning
