---
layout: post
published: true
title: You Shouldn't Have To Ask For Forgiveness
---

A couple of days ago I was part of a private email thread about the popular
Grace Hopper quote ["It's easier to ask forgiveness than it is to get
permission."][1] and the somewhat related [blog post][katelossepost] by [Kate
Losse][katelosse] (please go and read it first, it's really good). I got a
helpful and friendly nudge to put the response I wrote on here, so here it is
in a slightly edited version to fit the format:

I have so many opinions on that and I hope the following brain dump makes
sense/helps.

I should start off with the disclaimer that I think there is something to that
quote but it's been completely repurposed to serve as a backwards
justification for a lot of things. I think the variant ["If it's a good idea,
go ahead and do it. It is much easier to apologize than it is to get
permission."][1] is a much better version (although still problematic) of this
quote. But I highly dislike the often quoted form together with its corollary
"move fast and break things" which basically has the vast majority of the same
problems.

So why do I dislike it? First and for all because it's arrogant and
disrespectful. It has the implication that rules don't apply for some (for a
certain value of some) people and that it is in their judgement to decide
what applies to them. It also implicitly means, because (usually though not
always) rules are made to protect/help people, that what you want to do is
more important than protecting/helping. I'm probably extremely biased because
I work in infrastructure where a large part of work is maintenance. But in
computering what following this rule most likely means is hack something
together that works and then figure out how to maintain it and who. And in
that regard it often comes down to upholding the romantic VC notion of a 10X
engineer/lone wolf programmer who is so genius that you have to get everything
out of their way because they can change the game in an instant. That they
don't have to communicate, follow rules, or workflows, because their beautiful
mind justifies everything. Another thing I highly dislike.

The next problem I have with this statement is that it is so ambivalent that
it doesn't really mean anything. And as so often, can only be verified in
hindsight. The article you linked really pin pointed one of the major problems
there. In order to be granted forgiveness, you are betting on "the authority"
(this could be your manager, execs or tech leads, or even the police) to turn
a blind eye on something you did or even praise you for breaking the "law" for
making things better. This usually is only the case if you are a member of the
same race, culture, class, group as those you will have to ask for
forgiveness. Which doesn't work well for everybody. It's also important here,
that - if I'm not mistaken - the quote comes from a time where Grace Hopper
was almost retired and already an accomplished Rear Admiral. The power and
influence that comes with such a rank shouldn't be neglected. And I highly
doubt that the same thing worked when she was a Sea(wo)man or Petty Officer.

That being said there is something to that quote. But as I said in the
beginning, I see it more in the context of the variant quote. And more
importantly in the context of [efficiency thoroughness trade-off][2]. A lot of
times you can't ask everyone for permission to do something because it takes
too much time and doesn't make sense. Especially when it comes to computering
there is often a lot of merit in trying to get a prototype in place so there
is a concrete thing to talk about. It's also often worth it to only bounce
ideas off of a handful of people before trying it out instead of getting a
formal review and the exec's agreement to do it. But with all of this the
impact if it's a bad idea has to be taken into account. If everybody runs off
doing their weird ideas, we likely would have chaos. At the same time if
everybody spends their day with getting permissions about work, there won't be
any work getting done. Ideally we trust our colleagues that they know what is
needed to bring things forward. That is why there are always tendencies to
reduce bureaucracy and empower individuals. But I don't think this means you
should do things where you have to ask for forgiveness. Because if you have
to, you likely made someone else's day pretty miserable.

I hope this was a somewhat coherent write up and answers at least some of the
questions you had. Also I'm super happy to be proven wrong here since this is
very likely a pretty narrow view on things.


[1]: http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Grace_Hopper
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Efficiencyâ€“thoroughness_trade-off_principle
[katelossepost]: https://medium.com/@katelosse/the-unbearable-whiteness-of-breaking-things-521cb394fda2
[katelosse]: https://twitter.com/katelosse
